.\" Created from Texinfo source by yat2m 1.0
.TH DIRMNGR 8 2016-10-15 "GnuPG 2.1.8" "GNU Privacy Guard 2.1"
.SH NAME
.B dirmngr
\- CRL and OCSP daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  dirmngr
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Since version 2.1 of GnuPG, \fBdirmngr\fR takes care of accessing
the OpenPGP keyservers.  As with previous versions it is also used as
a server for managing and downloading certificate revocation lists
(CRLs) for X.509 certificates, downloading X.509 certificates, and
providing access to OCSP providers.  Dirmngr is invoked internally by
\fBgpg\fR, \fBgpgsm\fR, or via the \fBgpg-connect-agent\fR
tool.

For historical reasons it is also possible to start \fBdirmngr\fR
in a system daemon mode which uses a different directory layout.
However, this mode is deprecated and may eventually be removed.






.SH COMMANDS

Commands are not distinguished from options except for the fact that
only one command is allowed.

.TP
.B  --version
Print the program version and licensing information.  Note that you cannot
abbreviate this command.

.TP
.B  --help, -h
Print a usage message summarizing the most useful command-line options.
Not that you cannot abbreviate this command.

.TP
.B  --dump-options
Print a list of all available options and commands.  Note that you cannot
abbreviate this command.

.TP
.B  --server
Run in server mode and wait for commands on the \fBstdin\fR.  The
default mode is to create a socket and listen for commands there.
This is only used for testing.

.TP
.B  --daemon
Run in background daemon mode and listen for commands on a socket.
Note that this also changes the default home directory and enables the
internal certificate validation code.  This mode is deprecated.

.TP
.B  --list-crls
List the contents of the CRL cache on \fBstdout\fR. This is probably
only useful for debugging purposes.

.TP
.B  --load-crl \fIfile\fR
This command requires a filename as additional argument, and it will
make Dirmngr try to import the CRL in \fIfile\fR into it's cache.
Note, that this is only possible if Dirmngr is able to retrieve the
CA's certificate directly by its own means.  In general it is better
to use \fBgpgsm\fR's \fB--call-dirmngr loadcrl filename\fR command
so that \fBgpgsm\fR can help dirmngr.

.TP
.B  --fetch-crl \fIurl\fR
This command requires an URL as additional argument, and it will make
dirmngr try to retrieve an import the CRL from that \fIurl\fR into
it's cache.  This is mainly useful for debugging purposes.  The
\fBdirmngr-client\fR provides the same feature for a running dirmngr.

.TP
.B  --shutdown
This commands shuts down an running instance of Dirmngr.  This command
has currently no effect.

.TP
.B  --flush
This command removes all CRLs from Dirmngr's cache.  Client requests
will thus trigger reading of fresh CRLs.



.SH OPTIONS


.TP
.B  --options \fIfile\fR
Reads configuration from \fIfile\fR instead of from the default
per-user configuration file.  The default configuration file is named
\(oq\fIdirmngr.conf\fR\(cq and expected in the home directory.

.TP
.B  --homedir \fIdir\fR
Set the name of the home directory to \fIdir\fR.  This option is only
effective when used on the command line.  The default depends on the
running mode:

.RS

.TP
.B  With \fB--daemon\fR given on the commandline
the directory named \(oq\fI/usr/local/etc/gnupg\fR\(cq is used for configuration files
and \(oq\fI/usr/local/var/cache/gnupg\fR\(cq for cached CRLs.

.TP
.B  Without \fB--daemon\fR given on the commandline
the directory named \(oq\fI.gnupg\fR\(cq directly below the home directory
of the user unless the environment variable \fBGNUPGHOME\fR has been set
in which case its value will be used.  All kind of data is stored below
this directory.
.RE


.TP
.B  -v
.TP
.B  --verbose
Outputs additional information while running.
You can increase the verbosity by giving several
verbose commands to \fBdirmngr\fR, such as \fB-vv\fR.


.TP
.B  --log-file \fIfile\fR
Append all logging output to \fIfile\fR.  This is very helpful in
seeing what the agent actually does.

.TP
.B  --debug-level \fIlevel\fR
Select the debug level for investigating problems.  \fIlevel\fR may be a
numeric value or by a keyword:

.RS
.TP
.B  none
No debugging at all.  A value of less than 1 may be used instead of
the keyword.
.TP
.B  basic
Some basic debug messages.  A value between 1 and 2 may be used
instead of the keyword.
.TP
.B  advanced
More verbose debug messages.  A value between 3 and 5 may be used
instead of the keyword.
.TP
.B  expert
Even more detailed messages.  A value between 6 and 8 may be used
instead of the keyword.
.TP
.B  guru
All of the debug messages you can get. A value greater than 8 may be
used instead of the keyword.  The creation of hash tracing files is
only enabled if the keyword is used.
.RE

How these messages are mapped to the actual debugging flags is not
specified and may change with newer releases of this program. They are
however carefully selected to best aid in debugging.

.TP
.B  --debug \fIflags\fR
This option is only useful for debugging and the behaviour may change at
any time without notice.  FLAGS are bit encoded and may be given in
usual C-Syntax.

.TP
.B  --debug-all
Same as \fB--debug=0xffffffff\fR

.TP
.B  --gnutls-debug \fIlevel\fR
Enable debugging of GNUTLS at \fIlevel\fR.

.TP
.B  --debug-wait \fIn\fR
When running in server mode, wait \fIn\fR seconds before entering the
actual processing loop and print the pid.  This gives time to attach a
debugger.

.TP
.B  -s
.TP
.B  --sh
.TP
.B  -c
.TP
.B  --csh
Format the info output in daemon mode for use with the standard Bourne
shell respective the C-shell . The default ist to guess it based on the
environment variable \fBSHELL\fR which is in almost all cases
sufficient.

.TP
.B  --force
Enabling this option forces loading of expired CRLs; this is only
useful for debugging.

.TP
.B  --disable-ldap
Entirely disables the use of LDAP.

.TP
.B  --disable-http
Entirely disables the use of HTTP.

.TP
.B  --ignore-http-dp
When looking for the location of a CRL, the to be tested certificate
usually contains so called CRL Distribution Point (DP) entries
which are URLs describing the way to access the CRL.  The first found DP
entry is used.  With this option all entries using the HTTP
scheme are ignored when looking for a suitable DP.

.TP
.B  --ignore-ldap-dp
This is similar to \fB--ignore-http-dp\fR but ignores entries using
the LDAP scheme.  Both options may be combined resulting in
ignoring DPs entirely.

.TP
.B  --ignore-ocsp-service-url
Ignore all OCSP URLs contained in the certificate.  The effect is to
force the use of the default responder.

.TP
.B  --honor-http-proxy
If the environment variable \(oq\fIhttp_proxy\fR\(cq has been set, use its
value to access HTTP servers.

.TP
.B  --http-proxy \fIhost\fR[:\fIport\fR]
Use \fIhost\fR and \fIport\fR to access HTTP servers.  The use of this
option overrides the environment variable \(oq\fIhttp_proxy\fR\(cq regardless
whether \fB--honor-http-proxy\fR has been set.


.TP
.B  --ldap-proxy \fIhost\fR[:\fIport\fR]
Use \fIhost\fR and \fIport\fR to connect to LDAP servers.  If \fIport\fR
is ommitted, port 389 (standard LDAP port) is used.  This overrides any
specified host and port part in a LDAP URL and will also be used if host
and port have been ommitted from the URL.

.TP
.B  --only-ldap-proxy
Never use anything else but the LDAP "proxy" as configured with
\fB--ldap-proxy\fR.  Usually \fBdirmngr\fR tries to use other
configured LDAP server if the connection using the "proxy" failed.


.TP
.B  --ldapserverlist-file \fIfile\fR
Read the list of LDAP servers to consult for CRLs and certificates from
file instead of the default per-user ldap server list file. The default
value for \fIfile\fR is \(oq\fIdirmngr_ldapservers.conf\fR\(cq or
\(oq\fIldapservers.conf\fR\(cq when running in \fB--daemon\fR mode.

This server list file contains one LDAP server per line in the format

\fBhostname:port:username:password:base_dn\fR

Lines starting with a  \(aq#\(aq are comments.

Note that as usual all strings entered are expected to be UTF-8 encoded.
Obviously this will lead to problems if the password has orginally been
encoded as Latin-1.  There is no other solution here than to put such a
password in the binary encoding into the file (i.e. non-ascii characters
won't show up readable). ([The \fBgpgconf\fR tool might be
helpful for frontends as it allows to edit this configuration file using
percent escaped strings.])


.TP
.B  --ldaptimeout \fIsecs\fR
Specify the number of seconds to wait for an LDAP query before timing
out. The default is currently 100 seconds.  0 will never timeout.


.TP
.B  --add-servers
This options makes dirmngr add any servers it discovers when validating
certificates against CRLs to the internal list of servers to consult for
certificates and CRLs.

This options is useful when trying to validate a certificate that has
a CRL distribution point that points to a server that is not already
listed in the ldapserverlist. Dirmngr will always go to this server and
try to download the CRL, but chances are high that the certificate used
to sign the CRL is located on the same server. So if dirmngr doesn't add
that new server to list, it will often not be able to verify the
signature of the CRL unless the \fB--add-servers\fR option is used.

Note: The current version of dirmngr has this option disabled by default.


.TP
.B  --allow-ocsp
This option enables OCSP support if requested by the client.

OCSP requests are rejected by default because they may violate the
privacy of the user; for example it is possible to track the time when
a user is reading a mail.


.TP
.B  --ocsp-responder \fIurl\fR
Use \fIurl\fR as the default OCSP Responder if the certificate does
not contain information about an assigned responder.  Note, that
\fB--ocsp-signer\fR must also be set to a valid certificate.

.TP
.B  --ocsp-signer \fIfpr\fR|\fIfile\fR
Use the certificate with the fingerprint \fIfpr\fR to check the
responses of the default OCSP Responder.  Alternativly a filename can be
given in which case the respinse is expected to be signed by one of the
certificates described in that file.  Any argument which contains a
slash, dot or tilde is considered a filename.  Usual filename expansion
takes place: A tilde at the start followed by a slash is replaced by the
content of \(oq\fIHOME\fR\(cq, no slash at start describes a relative filename
which will be searched at the home directory.  To make sure that the
\fIfile\fR is searched in the home directory, either prepend the name
with "./" or use a name which contains a dot.

If a response has been signed by a certificate described by these
fingerprints no further check upon the validity of this certificate is
done.

The format of the \fIFILE\fR is a list of SHA-1 fingerprint, one per
line with optional colons between the bytes.  Empty lines and lines
prefix with a hash mark are ignored.


.TP
.B  --ocsp-max-clock-skew \fIn\fR
The number of seconds a skew between the OCSP responder and them local
clock is accepted.  Default is 600 (20 minutes).

.TP
.B  --ocsp-max-period \fIn\fR
Seconds a response is at maximum considered valid after the time given
in the thisUpdate field.  Default is 7776000 (90 days).

.TP
.B  --ocsp-current-period \fIn\fR
The number of seconds an OCSP response is considered valid after the
time given in the NEXT_UPDATE datum.  Default is 10800 (3 hours).


.TP
.B  --max-replies \fIn\fR
Do not return more that \fIn\fR items in one query.  The default is
10.

.TP
.B  --ignore-cert-extension \fIoid\fR
Add \fIoid\fR to the list of ignored certificate extensions.  The
\fIoid\fR is expected to be in dotted decimal form, like
\fB2.5.29.3\fR.  This option may be used more than once.  Critical
flagged certificate extensions matching one of the OIDs in the list
are treated as if they are actually handled and thus the certificate
won't be rejected due to an unknown critical extension.  Use this
option with care because extensions are usually flagged as critical
for a reason.

.TP
.B  --hkp-cacert \fIfile\fR
Use the root certificates in \fIfile\fR for verification of the TLS
certificates used with \fBhkps\fR (keyserver access over TLS).  If
the file is in PEM format a suffix of \fB.pem\fR is expected for
\fIfile\fR.  This option may be given multiple times to add more
root certificates.




.SH EXAMPLES

Here is an example on how to show dirmngr's internal table of OpenPGP
keyserver addresses.  The output is intended for debugging purposes
and not part of a defined API.

.RS 2
.nf
  gpg-connect-agent --dirmngr 'keyserver --hosttable' /bye
.fi
.RE

To inhibit the use of a particular host you have noticed in one of the
keyserver pools, you may use

.RS 2
.nf
 gpg-connect-agent --dirmngr 'keyserver --dead pgpkeys.bnd.de' /bye
.fi
.RE

The description of the \fBkeyserver\fR command can be printed using

.RS 2
.nf
 gpg-connect-agent --dirmngr 'help keyserver' /bye
.fi
.RE




.SH FILES

Dirmngr makes use of several directories when running in daemon mode:


.TP
.B  ~/.gnupg
.TP
.B  /etc/gnupg
The first is the standard home directory for all configuration files.
In the deprecated system daemon mode the second directory is used instead.

.TP
.B  /etc/gnupg/trusted-certs
This directory should be filled with certificates of Root CAs you
are trusting in checking the CRLs and signing OCSP Reponses.

Usually these are the same certificates you use with the applications
making use of dirmngr.  It is expected that each of these certificate
files contain exactly one DER encoded certificate in a file
with the suffix \(oq\fI.crt\fR\(cq or \(oq\fI.der\fR\(cq.  \fBdirmngr\fR reads
those certificates on startup and when given a SIGHUP.  Certificates
which are not readable or do not make up a proper X.509 certificate
are ignored; see the log file for details.

Applications using dirmngr (e.g. gpgsm) can request these
certificates to complete a trust chain in the same way as with the
extra-certs directory (see below).

Note that for OCSP responses the certificate specified using the option
\fB--ocsp-signer\fR is always considered valid to sign OCSP requests.

.TP
.B  /etc/gnupg/extra-certs
This directory may contain extra certificates which are preloaded
into the interal cache on startup. Applications using dirmngr (e.g. gpgsm)
can request cached certificates to complete a trust chain.
This is convenient in cases you have a couple intermediate CA certificates
or certificates ususally used to sign OCSP reponses.
These certificates are first tried before going
out to the net to look for them.  These certificates must also be
DER encoded and suffixed with \(oq\fI.crt\fR\(cq or \(oq\fI.der\fR\(cq.

.TP
.B  /usr/local/var/run/gnupg
This directory is only used in the deprecated system daemon mode.  It
keeps the socket file for accessing \fBdirmngr\fR services.  The
name of the socket file will be \(oq\fIS.dirmngr\fR\(cq.  Make sure that this
directory has the proper permissions to let \fBdirmngr\fR create
the socket file and that eligible users may read and write to that
socket.

.TP
.B  ~/.gnupg/crls.d
.TP
.B  /usr/local/var/cache/gnupg/crls.d
The first directory is used to store cached CRLs.  The \(oq\fIcrls.d\fR\(cq
part will be created by dirmngr if it does not exists but you need to
make sure that the upper directory exists.  The second directory is
used instead in the deprecated systems daemon mode.


.SH SIGNALS

A running \fBdirmngr\fR may be controlled by signals, i.e. using
the \fBkill\fR command to send a signal to the process.

Here is a list of supported signals:


.TP
.B  SIGHUP
This signals flushes all internally cached CRLs as well as any cached
certificates.  Then the certificate cache is reinitialized as on
startup.  Options are re-read from the configuration file.  Instead of
sending this signal it is better to use
.RS 2
.nf
gpgconf --reload dirmngr
.fi
.RE

.TP
.B  SIGTERM
Shuts down the process but waits until all current requests are
fulfilled.  If the process has received 3 of these signals and requests
are still pending, a shutdown is forced.  You may also use
.RS 2
.nf
gpgconf --kill dirmngr
.fi
.RE
instead of this signal

.TP
.B  SIGINT
Shuts down the process immediately.


.TP
.B  SIGUSR1
This prints some caching statistics to the log file.





.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgpgsm\fR(1),
\fBdirmngr-client\fR(1)

The full documentation for this tool is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If GnuPG and the info program are properly installed at your site, the
command

.RS 2
.nf
info gnupg
.fi
.RE

should give you access to the complete manual including a menu structure
and an index.



